Intelligent Retention filter in Analytics (#17283)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/trace_pipeline/trace_retention.md

{{< img src="tracing/apm_lifecycle/retention_filters.png" style="width:100%; background:none; border:none; box-shadow:none;" alt="Retention filters" >}}

With Datadog APM, [the ingestion and the retention of traces for 15 days][1] are fully customizable.

To track or monitor your volume of ingested and indexed data, see the [Usage Metrics][2] documentation.

## Retention filters

> After spans have been ingested, some are kept for 15 to 30 days according to the retention filters that have been set on your account.

Reviewer: this sentence will make people think they can configure the period of retention in their retention filters

> After spans have been ingested, some are kept for 15 to 30 days according to the retention filters that have been set on your account.

Author: ```suggestion
After spans have been ingested, some are kept for 15 days according to the retention filters that have been set on your account.
```

> Some retention filters are enabled by default, in order to ensure that you keep visibility over all of your services and endpoints, as well as errors and high-latency traces: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following retention filters are enabled by default to ensure that you keep visibility over all of your services and endpoints, as well as errors and high-latency traces: 
```

> - The [Intelligent Retention Filter](#datadog-intelligent-retention-filter) retains spans for every environment, service, operation and resource for different latency distributions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [Intelligent Retention Filter](#datadog-intelligent-retention-filter) retains spans for every environment, service, operation, and resource for different latency distributions.
```

> - The `Error Default` retention filter indexes error spans with `status:error`. The retention rate and the query are configurable. For instance, to capture production errors, set the query to `status:error, env:production`. Disable the retention filter if you do not want to capture the errors by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `Error Default` retention filter indexes error spans with `status:error`. The retention rate and the query are configurable. For example, to capture production errors, set the query to `status:error, env:production`. Disable the retention filter if you do not want to capture the errors by default.
```

- The `Application Security` retention filter is enabled if you are using Application Security Management. It ensures the retention of all spans in traces that have been identified as having an application security impact (an attack attempt).

> On top of these, you can create any number of additional [custom tag-based retention filters](#create-your-own-retention-filter) for your services, to capture the data that matters the most to your business.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to these, you can create any number of additional [custom tag-based retention filters](#create-your-own-retention-filter) for your services, to capture the data that matters the most to your business.
```

> **Note**: The permission `apm_retention_filter_write` is required to create, modify, or disable retention filters.

Reviewer 2: If Cecile is correct (below), then:
```suggestion
**Note**: The permission `apm_retention_filter_write` is required to create, delete, modify, enable, or disable retention filters.
```

> 

Reviewer: permission `apm_retention_filter_write` is required to create, delete, modify, or enable/disable retention filters.

{{< img src="tracing/trace_indexing_and_ingestion/retention_filters/retention_filters.png" style="width:100%;" alt="Retention Filters Page" >}}

In Datadog, on the [Retention Filters tab][3], you can see a list of all retention filters:

Filter Name
: The name of each retention filter used to index spans.

Filter Query
: The tag-based query for each filter.

Retention Rate

> : A percentage from 0 to 100% of how many matching spans are indexed. The retained spans are uniformly picked amongst spans matching the filter query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: A percentage from 0 to 100% of how many matching spans are indexed. The retained spans are uniformly chosen from among spans that match the filter query.
```

: Allows filters to be turned on and off.

**Note**: The order of the retention filter list changes indexing behavior. If a span matches a retention filter early in the list, the span is either kept or dropped. Any matching retention filter lower on the list does not catch the already-processed span.

The `Spans Indexed` column for each retention filter is powered by the `datadog.estimated_usage.apm.indexed_spans` metric, which you can use to track your indexed span usage. For more information, read [Usage Metrics][2], or see the [dashboard][4] available in your account.

<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: Retention filters do not affect what traces are collected by the Agent and sent to Datadog ("ingested"). The only way to change how much tracing data is ingested is through <a href="/tracing/trace_ingestion/mechanisms">ingestion controls</a>.</div>

### Datadog intelligent retention filter

The Datadog intelligent retention filter is always active for your services, and it keeps a representative selection of traces without requiring you to create dozens of custom retention filters.

It scans through the **service entry spans** and retains for 30 days:

> - At least one span (and the associated trace) for each combination of environment, service, operation and resource every 15 minutes at most to ensure to always find example traces in [service][9] and [resource][10] pages, even for low traffic endpoint.

Reviewer: should we add something here to remind the reader that we can only retain spans that are sent to our backend (ingested)?

> - At least one span (and the associated trace) for each combination of environment, service, operation and resource every 15 minutes at most to ensure to always find example traces in [service][9] and [resource][10] pages, even for low traffic endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- At least one span (and the associated trace) for each combination of environment, service, operation, and resource every 15 minutes at most, to ensure that you can always find example traces in [service][9] and [resource][10] pages, even for low traffic endpoints.
```

> - High latency spans for the `p75`, `p90`, and `p95` percentile spans (and the associated trace) for each combination of environment, service, operation and resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- High latency spans for the `p75`, `p90`, and `p95` percentile spans (and the associated trace) for each combination of environment, service, operation, and resource.
```

- A representative selection of errors, ensuring error diversity (for example, response status code 400s, 500s).

> **Note**: Spans indexed by the intelligent retention filter are **not counted towards the usage** of indexed spans, and hence **do not impact your bill**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: Spans indexed by the intelligent retention filter are **not counted towards the usage** of indexed spans, and so **do not impact your bill**.
```

> If there are specific tags, or attributes for which you want to index more spans than what diversity sampling retains, then [create your own retention filter](#create-your-own-retention-filter).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there are specific tags or attributes for which you want to index more spans than what diversity sampling retains, then [create your own retention filter](#create-your-own-retention-filter).
```

- High-priority customers using a mission-critical feature of your SaaS solution.
- Specific versions of an online delivery service application.

## Trace search and analytics on indexed spans

### In the Trace Explorer

> By default, spans indexed by custom retention filters **and** the intelligent retention filter are included in the Trace Explorer [aggregated views][6] (timeseries, toplist, table)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, spans indexed by custom retention filters **and** the intelligent retention filter are included in the Trace Explorer [aggregated views][6] (timeseries, toplist, table).
```

> However, because the diversity sampled set of data which is **not uniformly sampled** (i.e. not proportionnally representative of the full traffic) and biased towards errors and high latency traces, you can choose to exclude these from these views by adding `-retained_by:diversity_sampling` query parameter to the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, because the diversity-sampled set of data is **not uniformly sampled** (that is, not proportionally representative of the full traffic) and is biased towards errors and high latency traces, you can choose to exclude these spans from these views by adding `-retained_by:diversity_sampling` query parameter to the query.
```

The `retained_by` attribute is present on all retained spans. Its value is: 

> - `retained_by:diversity_sampling` if the span was captured by diversity sampling (i.e. the [Intelligent retention filter](#datadog-intelligent-retention-filter))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `retained_by:diversity_sampling` if the span was captured by diversity sampling (that is, the [Intelligent retention filter](#datadog-intelligent-retention-filter)).
```

> - `retained_by:retention_filter` if the span was captured by any [tag-based retention filter](#create-your-own-retention-filter) (including the `Error Default` and `Application Security Default` retention filters)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `retained_by:retention_filter` if the span was captured by any [tag-based retention filter](#create-your-own-retention-filter), including the `Error Default` and `Application Security Default` retention filters.
```

{{< img src="tracing/trace_indexing_and_ingestion/retention_filters/trace_analytics.png" style="width:100%;" alt="Retained By facet" >}}

> ### In dashboards, notebooks and monitors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### In dashboards, notebooks, and monitors
```

> For the reasons explained above, spans indexed by the intelligent retention filter **are excluded** in dashboards and notebooks APM queries as well as trace analytics monitors' evaluations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the reasons explained above, spans indexed by the intelligent retention filter are **excluded** from APM queries that appear in dashboards and notebooks, and also **excluded** from trace analytics monitor evaluation.
```
